---
layout: post
title: "Open Set"
description: ""
category: Math
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Quoted from [Analysis II by Victor Guillemin, MIT](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-101-analysis-ii-fall-2005/lecture-notes/lecture1.pdf) with modification.

## Neighborhood

**Definition:** Given a point $x_i \in X$, and a real number $\epsilon > 0$, we define

$$
\Phi(x_i, \epsilon) = \lbrace x_j \in X \vert d(x_i, x_j) < \epsilon \rbrace
$$

where $d(\cdot, \cdot)$ is a mtric on $X$ (and thus $(X, d)$ is [metric space](/math/2018/05/09/kernel)).

We call $\Phi(x_i, \epsilon)$ the **$\epsilon$-neighborhood** of $x_i$ in space $X$. Obviously, $x_i \in \Phi(x_i, \epsilon)$.

Given a subspace $Y \subseteq X$ (已知 $\mathbb{R}^n$ 与 $\mathbb{R}^m$ 不存在 subspace 的关系 when $n \neq m$，所以 subspace 不应该有 dimension 上的变化), the $\epsilon$-neighborhood of $x_i$ in space $Y$ is just $\Phi(x_i, \epsilon) \cap Y$.

## Open and Closed Sets

**Definition:** A set $U$ in space $X$ is **open** if $\forall x_i \in U, \exists \epsilon_i > 0$ such that $\Phi(x_i, \epsilon_i) \subseteq U$.

- 比如开区间 (open interval) $(a, b)$ 就可以看做一个 open set；闭区间 $[a, b]$ 在 $a, b$ 两点上无法满足 open set 的要求。

**Proposition:** A neighborhood is not necessarily an open set.

**Proof:** Given a neighborhood $\Phi(x_i, \epsilon) = \lbrace x_j \in X \vert d(x_i, x_j) < \epsilon \rbrace$ and a point $x_j \in \Phi(x_i, \epsilon)$, $\forall \epsilon'$ we can define $\Phi(x_j, \epsilon') = \lbrace x_k \in X \vert d(x_j, x_k) < \epsilon' \rbrace$. However, according to triangle inequality, we only know that $d(x_i, x_k) \leq \epsilon + \epsilon'$. It's not guaranteed that $d(x_i, x_k) < \epsilon$, i.e. not guaranteed that $x_k \in \Phi(x_i, \epsilon)$, i.e. not guaranteed that $\Phi(x_j, \epsilon') \subseteq \Phi(x_i, \epsilon)$.

**Proposition:** Every open set is a union of neighborhoods.

**[Proof](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/830584):** Let $U$ be an open set. For each $x \in U$, let $N_x$ be the open neighborhood in $U$ containing $x$, which is guaranteed to exist by the definition. Consider $\mathcal{N} = \underset{x \in U}{\cup} N_x$. Since for every $x \in U$, $x \in N_x \subset \mathcal{N}$, we find $U \subset \mathcal{N}$. Since every $N_x \subset U$, we find $\mathcal{N} \subset U$. Therefore, $U = \mathcal{N}$ is a union of neighborhoods of points of $U$.

**Proposition:** Let $\lbrace U_i \vert i \in I \rbrace$ be a collection of open sets in space $X$, where $I$ is just a labeling set that can be finite or infinite. Then the set $\underset{i \in I}{\cup} U_i$ is open.

- 这里 labeling set 应该是 [index set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Index_set) 的意思，即 a set whose members label or index members of another set. 比如 $\lbrace 1,2,3 \rbrace$ 就是 $\lbrace x_1, x_2, x_3 \rbrace$ 的 index set。
- 可以是 infinite union

**Proposition:** Let $\lbrace U_i \vert i = 1,\dots, N \rbrace$ be a finite collection of open sets in space $X$. Then the set $\overset{N}{\underset{i=1}{\cap}} U_i$ is open.

- 为什么不能是 infinite intersection? [反例](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/1460856)：$\overset{\infty}{\underset{n=1}{\cap}} (-\frac{1}{n}, \frac{1}{n}) = \lbrace 0 \rbrace$
    - [注意这里并不是取极限](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2274229/problem-with-a-limit-and-the-infinite-intersection-of-open-sets)，而是因为 $\forall n>0$, $0 \in (-\frac{1}{n}, \frac{1}{n})$, hence $0 \in \underset{n}{\cap} (-\frac{1}{n}, \frac{1}{n})$